---
title: 'Building online Hive'
date: 2023-10-30
toc: true
permalink: /posts/2023/10/hive/
tags:
  - web dev
  - programming
  - game
---

I **love** the game [Hive](https://www.gen42.com/games/hive). It's a remarkably unique and
addictive abstract strategy game. Gameplay involves placing and moving various hexagonal
insect tiles, with the objective of surrounding your opponent's *Queen Bee* before they
surround yours. This post is about an ongoing project of mine to build a minimalist
**online multiplayer** version of the game from scratch.

> <span style='font-size: 13pt; font-style: normal'>
**Updates**: At the time of writing, this project is ongoing, although significant headway
has been made. You can stay up-to-date (or contribute!) by following the [project page on
GitHub](https://github.com/dariotrinchero/hive).
</span>
{:.notice--info}

> TODO add screenshot of game in progress

## Plan for this post

With a project of this scale, there's a lot to talk about. Significant development time
goes into various *server-side* requirements for a live multiplayer game, such client-server
websocket communication, parity checks between the two client-side game states, timer
synchronization, and so on. More time still goes into designing UI/UX. Of course, this is
all vital for a functional and enjoyable game, but it is hardly the fun part of the
project.

For me, the fun part is the **game logic**, so that's what I'll focus on here. The plan
from here is to take a tour through each of the most interesting rules and their
implementation. Before that, let's quickly go over the basics of how the game is played.

## Basics of Hive

Hive is a 2-player perfect-information abstract strategy game. One player plays **white**
pieces, while the other plays **black**. In the basic version, each player has an inventory
of the following **hexagonal tiles**:

- 1x Queen Bee
- 2x Spiders
- 2x Beetles
- 3x Grasshoppers
- 3x Ants

A couple of game expansions add the following additional pieces to each player's starting
inventory:

- 1x Mosquito
- 1x Pillbug
- 1x Ladybug

There is **no board** - the game can be played on any flat surface. A starting player
(of either color) is chosen - let's call them **player 1** - and they begin by placing
any tile in the play area. Then, **player 2** plays any of their tiles in a hexagonal
space *adjacent to the starting tile*.

> TODO add SVG example starting configuration

From this point forward, play alternates between the two players, who each on their
respective turns **must** take exactly **one** of the following 2 actions:

1. **place** a new tile in an open hexagonal space that
	1. *is* adjacent to at least one of the *their tiles*, and
	1. *is not* adjacent to any of their *opponent's tiles*, or
1. **move** one of their tiles, according to the **movement rules**.

## Where the project is at

> TODO
